202311251416
Status: #idea
Tags: #story 

# Notes On War

My Story:

On October 7, Israel faced the biggest ground attack by Hamas it has ever encountered. Hamas managed to kill more than a thousand Israeli citizens, inciting great hate and a overwhelming response. At the time it happened I was home alone, my parents over seas on a vacation and my sister at her home about an hour away from me. It was typical saturday with me waking up late, my cat near, and going about my day. I usually don't watch TV or the news on my phone, I don't use my phone all that much in the mornings and so it happened. 

I received a phone call. It was my commander. He told me to find a way to reach the base in any way I could. When I questioned what happened he just said "open the tv and watch the news". It was then I understood something big had happened. Opening the TV I immediately understood, we were attacked, something truly big is occuring and I think this might be war yet, I don't think hard about it and call up friends to see whether there was anyone who could take me to the base. All my tries but to no avail. I informed my commander that I can not reach the base that day. 

In all honestly I was scared. Think about your countries border being breached and many militants are on their way to homes to kill as many people as they can lay their hands on. It is not some phantasy or distant future, it is now: immediate, near, comming.

The next day in the morning, getting out of my house was quite scary. Especially in uniform. You don't know whether there are Hamas militants somewhere near to targeting you. Actually it was my family that scared me. Well let's say talking to them had quite the effect. Regardless all form of safety I had known for years was lost after knowing Hamas was deep inside Israel. After reaching the bus station I got on my bus and was on my way. People I know who got on the bus too talked to me. Some religious people said they did not know of the attack at all, as they had no phone on Shabbat. 

On the way to the base I could see army vehicles of many kinds, some tanks, some simple armored vehicles. All on their way to the south where most of the militants came from and are concentrated at. You could even hear a military air plane roam the skies. The feeling of war was in the air and it very much looked like it. I remember looking outside the window of the bus I was on; seeing tanks riding along the roads, hearing fighter jets in the sky and the tension of something big occurring. I knew at that time that we were at war. It was a feeling of war. 

After reaching my base, and getting ready, I went to my work place and I was told "You are now going to help drag bombs". For four days all I saw was the tractor a bomb cart and bombs. The amount of bombs we had to drag was overwhelming. I remember seeing the constant change in fighter jet formation. I in hindsight understood that we were preparing for more than I expected. When I spoke with my friend about it she said the base has never seen this amount of bomb production and bomb dropping in all her time in the base. This mean that the time we were experiencing was indeed overwhelming. The sheer amount of ammunition we went through meant I understood quickly how the landscape in Gaza is going to look like. This also meant that a ground invasion was nearing as the air force is preparing the ground. During this time, as we worked helping dragging bombs, our schedule was 6 hours of work and for 12 rest which meant we had no consistent rest schedule. Instead, we worked twice in the day and once at night, all the time dragging bombs in our tractor. I remember that these six hours went slow. The horrible tracktor exhaust pip that sent horrible smoke that I sometimes breathed. We worked the full six hours for the team responsible telling us what to do was constantly making mistakes. We go to bring a carriage and it does not appear in place, we go and move carriages from place to place for no reason; fighter-jets had constantly changed configuration to adapt to a multi-country war and we were the ones carrying this burden. You could see the confusion for what was right to do from the bombs we carried. We began with the dumb bombs meant for leveling the earth - no gps guidance, no nothing. Some had a poisonous covers that you shouldn't touch with your bare hands. Every once in a while you could see fighter-jets with new ammunition meant for Lebanon as configurations changed trying to adapt. The loud tracktor sound constant fighter jet lift-offs were constantly heard from daylight to deep in the night. I know first-hand from a pilot who was there: Gaza airspace was packed with Israel's fighter-jets and aircraft, a real life mid air congestion problem was created, unheard of before.I think that for some it might be hard to understand this but, each fighter-jet can carry TONS of explosives. The destruction that was caused by these bombs is on a level I don't think many places will ever be able to comprehend luckily. 

After these 4 days, I came back to my work place, to find many new faces these were the reservists who got called up. For 2 weeks after these 4 days I continued working hard in trying both to make sure there are many good units we could use to replace faulty ones. Along with it I learned as much as I could from the reservists who came. 

During this time I ended working on many airplanes which had bombs attached to them. Normally in regular times, there are people who first disarm the airplane and only then I come to fix it. But these times things have become quite different. I ended up working on armed airplanes very often. This time I for some reason had not felt the same way I felt when I began working on combat airplanes. I for some reason don't have this  [[Combat-Aircrafts-Are-Scary]] mentality anymore. Even though I was working on significantly worse (safety wise) conditions. 

We worked 12 hour shifts split between everyone so some worked only during the day and some the night. I ended up working during the day, so I had ample opportunity to both learn and do things during the day that I would be too tired to do at night. I remember the tireless days and nights. The work everyone had to go through. And the amount I had learned. Bad habbits and knowledge gaps I had from the teachings of my seniors were filled by reservists knowledge. I was not only fixing things faster but also knowing why I am doing what I am doing, and what to do when things don't go as planned. 

After 2 weeks of gruesome, tireless work, we had finished fixing all equipment we had. So, having all this time to do anything, me and my friend began looking around and searching for what else can we do. And there came to me the first opportunity which was upgrading the computer for the AIU test station. The AIU is a complicated piece of hardware in terms of the amount of unique signals that go in and out of it. It had a white computer and a black computer sitting on it's desk. The white computer was a 1995 computer which required up-to 15 minutes to load everything needed and begin testing. The black computer was a failed attempt of a israeli team at upgrading this old white computer.

As I learned of this I thought "Why not try to do this upgrade myself?" and so the journey began. I began learning how does the station work both in hardware and especially software. Although the AIU is itself complicated because of the amount of signals it is capable of processing, The test station that tests the hardware is in my opinion even more complicated. Not only is it capable of simulating every signal required it is also extremely dynamic by design. So dynamic that I had spent many weeks understanding how does it work. Although I ended up unsuccessful in my attempt, I ended up opening the door for more successful attempts later.

One of the reservists who came is one of the people who brought the F15I airplane to  Israel. He took it upon himself to fix an old Display test station. This test station is used to fix both the displays themselves and their computer (yes your read it right it has it's own computer just for displays). Because at this point we have almost all units we needed to fix fixed, we thought why not try to fix these testing stations.

So far I was unsuccessful. With lacking parts, dying computers, weird software requirements and more I couldn't fix these stations. But the fight has not ended and I am still trying.  

***===Couple months later===***

Success!! My friend Shalev and I have managed to do a couple of things:
 - Upgrade 3 computers into new ones 
 - Fix Displays test station
 - Fix HUD test station 
 - Fix NAVIGATION pod test station

So this begins with the Displays Test Station. We at first were confronted with a broken plug. The main plug that all important testing signals go through was broken, and needed a replacement. Second, we had a video generator which had a address which we needed to change from 15 to 16. At first I did not understand why but later I figured out that the devices work on a GPIB bus which every device has to have a known address beforehand to access it. Third we had a card in the testing station which did not turn on (meaning it was broken). Another challenge was the fact that the computer running this Testing Station was old and likely to break in the future. 

And so, with these challenges we began working. I say we because we were a team consisting of me, my friend Shalev and one reservist. I early on thought that we should do the upgrade of the computers just by porting the software and drivers. At some point I understood that this is not going to work. I later on found out that for one thing in particular the software support is up-to windows NT 4.0. This meant that we couldn't do the switch to a new computer and a new solution was to be found. My friend suggested using a Virtual Machine to which I agreed would be a good idea to explore. While he was busy figuring out how to make the VM work, I began helping the reservist in fixing the station. 

At first we began working on the plug figuring out all the correct wiring from the schematics we had available. In the same time we tried to understand how to make the card in the testing station show on it's display numbers. The number indicate the internal state the card is at. 1 through 9 are startup values where they show the state of the card as it is setting itself up. When it shows 0 it means that the card thinks that all of it's inner circuitry is working correctly. I at that time did not even know how to read the schematics to know which components are on the card let alone how everything is connected up. 

So he taught me everything. The reservist is called Ronen Shilon, he taught me how to read the schematics, how to understand the American documentation and shared some wisdom on what were the most common failures they experienced. So I began helping. After I learned how to read the schematics, I began not only reading them but mapping signals that go through some chips and placing the most common signal names as ones that the chip is responsible for. Along with understanding the basic architecture the card was built in mind with. I read the documentation to find whether there were easier ways the Americans have left us with. I have found a couple but later they proved not as useful as I thought. 

All this work essentially has eventually paid off, we made the card light up and show eventually the number 0 meaning it was operation and there were no major errors. We replaced the broken plug with a new one. Along with managing after quite some time to write to the address value 16 to the Video Generator. 

But for some reason the station did not want to start up. So I looked into it. I saw that there was a communication issue the hub which splits the ethernet network between all the ethernet devices connected had gone bad. Replacing it with a new one did not seem to help. I then discovered I put a faulty one too. Going through a couple hubs I eventually stumbled upon one which worked. Replacing it worked flawlessly, I could use ping and eventually find the addresses were all correct and everything worked as expected. And yet the station showed another error "GPIB Controller". What? What is that? 

The station contains a white GPIB-ENET controller which is responsible for translating from ethernet to GPIB and also server as a controller for the GPIB bus. This controller seemed to be working with lights turning up as you give it power and so see assumed it to be working. Trying eventually to replace it with a new one and yet nothing... the error stayed all the same. I looked at the printed documentation we had, I saw that this device should contain an IP Address. If this is the case of course switching it up does not work, it contains a different IP Address. Since I had no access to the code at that moment I tried to do everything but change the program. 

The switching back and forth with the HUB and GPIB-ENET controller caused the computer which controls the HUD station to die. It couldn't recognize the ethernet card it had installed. This spurred 3 days of hellish trials where I worked like crazy trying to figure out what was the problem and to fix it. So I changed computers and yet it still didn't work. In the end we needed to both change the computer and for some reason kind of reset the controller which gets the commands from the computer on the station end. This made me learn how the station worked in it fullest. I spent time in understanding exactly how everything is made up and how every component is set up to get the final result. 

Since the HUD station problem got resolved I will diverge your attention again to the Displays Test Station. The problem at this stage was burning the IP Address onto the GPIB-ENET Controller. So I looked and there seemed to be a program called IP-Assign which promises to do just that. Using this program resulted in an error. We hit a wall. The only program which can do this burning is broken and we can not fix it. And as per usual I looked into the documentation again and later the internet, I have found that all I need to do is just send a RARP packet to the controller 10 times. Using just this information I wanted to write an application for burning this IP onto the controller. 

Because I was lacking in time and ability for I was base, I put it on hold. On the 14th of October 2023 I got full access to the code of the test station. This allowed me to change the IP which the station was looking for into one which I knew will work. **And aurica it worked!!!** the station responded and allowed us to do very basic operations. 3 days later I came back with the program which does the burning which I made myself. Just off of the instructions I listed above, I send 10 RARP packets with 10ms intervals between each-other. And it worked first try. 8 hours of making sure it will work have paid off immensely. 

Around this stage after many head beatings to make things work, my friend made the VM finally work. Replacing the old white computers with black ones to create a new white computer spare. This helped us assure that the stations will work for years from today. 

Another thing which I thought about was the fact that we still had only one HUB which worked for two stations. This was not an ideal situation. Eventually I convinced my Commander to buy a new cheep 30nis switch to create two fully working stations. 

***===Couple weeks later===***

The work intensity has plummeted immensely but the NAVIGATION pod test station has for some reason failed. I looked into it and it seemed to just want to recover from a bad state which I allowed it to do. This fixed the first problem. Two weeks later it again turned into a bad state which windows 10 recovery mode helped solve. These fixes are although small and insignificant but would cost the army real money to bring someone knowledgeable enough to fix. This should serve as a reminder of how bad can a institute get when it it built with rot to it. Instead of realizing the talent that comes through it's doors, the Army is willing to pay hefty money just not to change the way it is structured. 

There is of-course more to say about that. The army is rotten to a degree, and it works in a completely inefficient manner which any sane person can see. And yet as a system it is blind to this. By imploring people who sit and pay the money to do so while not understanding anything about the situation on ground it creates a situation where we now have to pay a hefty price for maintenance and bad avionics. 

---

Around April there was a change to the structure of our Avionics Technician Team. The old structure was people who are responsible for some types of units were going to the airplane to fix their systems, then, go to the lab and fix the units that came from the airplane. This created a work environment where some expertise could be formed around the fixing of these systems. The new model tries unify work teams in terms of knowledge but separate them in terms of types of work. So, you now have people who are only going to the airplane and switch faulty units for good ones and others which fix faulty units back at the lab. The only ones who can form expertise are the ones at the lab. If you go to the airplane because of a problem, you will need to know how to fix everything contained in it. Just as a reminder in Israel as of today are men serve for 2.8 years while women serve 2 years. This means that people who end up in the air force have around 2 years to form expertise. This is not enough for the amount of systems they end up responsible for. 

How do I know that this is not enough time? Well the test has been made many times all over again and again. This is not something new as it is a concept that has been tested in the air force for quite some time now. Many flights have already tested this formula and the general conclusion is over time the work done by gets worse. It has been reiterated to me for quite some time by all of the old commanders I had. They all say the same thing as they have seen the same script all over again happening to us.

Notes: 

There are a couple of things that I want to take note. 
About justice: It is hard to really say anything about right or wrong in war as all sides lose. The perspective that I now have is that war is usually justified by the situation. Regardless of outsiders perspective, those who participate in war have a good reason for it. They justify it with that reason and act accordingly. 

About institutes: Large institutes usually all have the same problem for if they don't have random noise disturb it's functions and cause some positive growth and change both to it's structure and it's organization it will rot. This rotting will go unnoticeable since to the outside it will show that things are alright. This is of course not the case but it matters not. This happened before to large institutions and it will happen again time and time again. So long as noise it not used to break bad habits, general decline with time is to be expected (the same bureaucracy which helped the army raise to it's greatness is the same that kills it today). 

I talked to my old retired commander. He said that most of the problems we faced while trying to fix the now old F15I he already told the higherups. Today's problems which we face he has already alerted from! This is a completely insane. The way the system is ignorant to the asking and alerting from the inside. I am pretty sure the same has happened on October 7 where there were alerts from within but no action by the system. There seems to be a threshold for where when something doesn't conform to the norm it gets treated like noise. He continued to tell me that the way the system is structured is wrong on many levels. Well let us look for ourselves this is how the IAF is built: 

The system is built up of commanders who just said they want to continue working for this "profession" and people who become officers. Officers don't have any knowledge of what they are managing. The underlying problem is that people of power have the capacity to make decisions without any underlying ground basis. If there is money it will get spent, if there is no money it won't. No real problems will get solved like that. Real needs will require long term thinking and cost-benefit analysis which they don't know how to make since they don't have the experience or knowledge required. 

All of this creates a complete detachment from reality, allowing bad neglect to form over the years. If no external chaos leads to the shaking up of these people requiring them to act and fix internal problems, they don't act up. This is the most fundamental problem of a large beurocratic system, who's structure over time has created a monolithic beast with so much weight it almost can not move.

---

---***Months later***---

It was just as any other day on this day I was supposed to go home to celebrate a jewish holiday. For some reason a day before we were informed that we might have a delay in our return home, and the final decision for the base whether to stop it's troops from returning home or not was to be decided at 2. And so 2 came and our commanders went on to decided what will be with our return home. The decision came, and we were ordered to stay. This decision came after some people have already stayed at base for 21 days. I remember walking down our building and seeing some girls beginning to cry and they understand that their return home is to be proponed by another week. Everyone was depressed by this fact as everybody have already been at least one whole week at base, wanting to return home. People with their faces down, people angrily telling their parents they will not return home. I was of course one of them, quickly notifying my parents of my widening stay calming them for I will be home in a week. Of course at the time we could not understand this decision, yet a couple hours later doubts of the situation had been cleared away. 

A reservist who I like had came back and almost frantically asked us to move equipment down a floor. He was worried that something bad is going to happen. I could hear it in his worried voice, see it in his clear eyes, something we have yet to experience will happen soon. After moving all important equipment down hopefully into a safer enclosure, we were told to move immediately into a bus. This bus we were told will take us to a school nearby. We could not understand why but we obliged. I went quickly to my room first, to secure a book from my collection at base. My friend near me got a call and was told that he could leave base to his home. He quickly got his cloths inside his bag and went home. Quickly running towards the bus to make sure I arrive in time; there I see my friends inside the bus. I sat beside my close friend and couple minutes later the bus turned it's engines on and we were on the move.

The roads were filled with cars for a cemetery was near and likely had many people come lament over the death of a soldier who died a day prior, a 10 minute trip tripled to a 30 minute one in an instant. Once we arrived inside the school we were required to sign up, so we could be tracked and people will not get lost. There after arriving we began to wait. By then we understood that Iran was bound to attack. It was also clear by than that almost no one stayed at base only officers and people to protect the base were left. All fighter jets were in the air. The whole base was a vacant place with almost no signs of life. And we waited... and waited. At some point I thought about my parents and told them "If something happens, please hide in shelter". In quite the coincidence one hour later Iran attacked Israel for the second time. At this time more than 180 ballistic missiles were shot from Iran on their way. Everyone was prepared and went to shelter. Hiding inside the shelter our cellular connection went away and our only form of communication was a small radio a friend brought with him. Listening to the radio it slowly dawned on us the magnitude of this attack. With three bases targeted, my base was one of them. An hour later we got out of the shelter and contacted our parents as there were no casualties, we had notified them that everything was fine. Couple hours after we returned to base; the next day I saw the damage cased. In a place near where I work one ballistic missile landed. You could see all the windows in the area shattered. No window in quite a large radius escaped this fate.

Since there were no casualties the result was quite positive. But of course that was one of the reasons for the planned move of removing almost everyone from base. Otherwise we might have suffered significant casualties.

-- NOTE: Highly boring yet oddly very for me meditating to write about finding new things on the Test Station

At this point we have reached a cease-fire agreement with Lebanon. For the most part things have mostly calmed down and I have found myself for the past 2 weeks tried to figure our how to make my life fixing the Test Stations we have easier. For the longest time what I have done was the following: 1) Find multiple units fail on the same tests under a Test Station  2) Figure out which test cards and signals are being utilized for the test that falls 3) replace or cross two chips and see if the test now passes 4) repeat.

To remedy the situation I have found in documentation what seems to be Built In Self Tests or BIST for short. The Test Station contains 3 types of cards each with their own unique features. The first type of the NVME162-A022 Bus Controller controller which controls the VME communication happening inside the chasse; the second type is A16 Hybrid Custom cards for which the cards IMUX, VIDMUX -1001, -1003 help with MUXing and switching signals across the test station; the third type of cards are Common Block Motherboard and Daughterboard combination which have a versatile feature set. What is important to note is that the documentation if read carefully contains almost all information needed to access BIST functionality within the cards yet I still relied heavily on the source code supplied with the Test Station in order to inspect and learn of the full capabilities of the cards. This of course meant that I have a unique point of understanding the station from within without relying on boring documentation that obscures what I am searching for. 

To begin I the card which I needed to fix the most has always been the Instrumentation MUX or IMUX for short. This card has been consistently breaking for no reason as the integrated circuits inside it were already old and new IC's we were putting were most likely faulty themselves. For I would say around 8 months my life has been hard fixing all problems in that card. Slowly but surely as I spent more effort I began understanding all the circuitry that was going on inside the card. One day I searched the documentation for some problem we had and I had found something called "Monitor" inside IMUX card. This Monitor was a capability the card had to watch and tell the card to conduct tests which would greatly help me fix the card itself faster. I hurriedly looked at what I would need but information was scarce. I only knew that communication was most likely serial though I could not verify it and that I had to have a special connection to the card since it had a ethernet head. I looked over the schematics and saw the main chip. Looking through it's datasheet I quickly figured out it was communicating in UART. From there I believed that UART is what I needed since nothing seemed to work (I tried to connect a serial looking port on the card used to debug it to my computer to no avail). To keep it short, I eventually figured out that I needed a crossed cable with a ethernet head and a serial port to connect to my  PC. Creating the cable and testing yielded great results allowing me to try this feature for the first time. I can not tell you how much better it is to use this feature than to figure out everything myself. The time I will be saving is great and something that I can not underestimate. The simple act of trying new things and creating this cable has significantly reduced the time which I will have to spend finding and fixing faults in the card. 

Now, this functionallity is unique to IMUX and VIDMUX -1001, -1003 cards. For the NVME162-A022 card I have found the original manufacturers manuals along with some people who already figured out from the same manuals how to fix the card (debug it and more). For this reason I will be turning to the last type of card which we had to fix. This last type has been a significant set back. It required me to understand now to communicate with the station in 2 ways, understand the whole architecture and it's connections, understand where the test lied and which commands trigger them, understand how some flags are being set in order to access printing of tests. All in all, a significant endeavor which has been done. I have reviewd I believe more than 7 documentation books all with different information,  looked at the code like a madman for 3 days and spent across the board across a week of my time trying to figure this out. These are capabilities which no one knows how to use and I am trying to figure it out all on my own. Along the way I understood things to a significantly greater degree and today I believe that there are no more "secrets" I am waiting to find. I say this since I have carefully read the documentation, understood the basic architecture of how everything is built and looked around the code to find missing "gems" which might lurk around in unintelligible fashion. 

The solution was connecting through a special cable I needed to find to get console printing. Sending commands through a special command utility on the CMD through the correct IP address and Port along with the correct command for each card which obviously I had to find all the correct values for. To top it all off, there is a debuglevel flag which when set to 1 on some cards causes printing and on others above 1 triggers printing or some other functionality, or sometimes completely disregarded.  

---
# References

None
