
# Justice

As I think about it some more, actually the idea of exploring justice is more enticing to me than even. This is because it would set me up for good action when faced with situations where justice is of great importance. What is justice? How do I know whether the actions of another are in-fact just or not. Does it matter? Should I be just? Should I be with people who are good and just or not? Can such people change? 

In Plato's Republic he notes that when comparing between ultimate justice and ultimate evil/in-justice we know that being the ultimate evil is more beneficial to the individual. The ultimate in-justice is fooling everybody that your control and benefit is good. A false king sitting on the throne benefiting, fooling everybody while not ever getting caught, is the ultimate evil. Since you never fact the consequences. Whereas ultimate just would be just to everybody but might get screwed by the evil king even if just. So ultimate evil no downside great upside, ultimate just has great downside (lost reputation/money/more) and no materialistic or spiritual upside.

When bringing the discussion to our daily lives: cheating is often seen as evil. And here again, we can go into the just/in-just argument with great tools to guide us. A cheater that doesn't get caught is the ultimate evil. While someone who doesn't cheat is just. So again why should anybody be just when then can be in-just and get away with it? The common solution to why you should be just then is that you will get caught. This is a reasonable response but doesn't really cover the whole spectrum. What about when you don't caught. Does it not bring more upside than downside if you are a really good manipulator. This is probably why many people cheat. It is because they see the upside and don't believe that there is a great enough downside to their behavior. I also think that not only that but you can also see that they truly don't see this as wrong. At least when they do it. 

Here I believe that we can go into an even more philosophical realm of right/wrong and meaning. Where is meaning? For all I can see meaning is found in both the content and the interpreter. Content itself is meaningless. Just like a world in a foreign language sounds meaningless to you if you don't know the language. Yet the interpreter is meaningless too without content to interpret. Just without hearing words you can't interpret something thus gain meaning you want to get conveyed. So we know that content and the interpreter, standing on their own, are meaningless. Meaning can only be found in a strange dance between content and interpretation. 

If the meaning of anything is in the eyes of the observer just as much as it is in reality. Nothing is right or wrong fundamentally. The then only right action for dealing with somebody who sees the world differently and believes that they can cheat and get away with it is: don't be friends with such people, or, try to change their world. Since I don't believe that changing somebody's world is a easy feat, a practical implementation of an action here is just to lose contact with the problematic people. 

# Vengeance

From seeing Naruto and reflecting on my life, it seems that the question of vengeance, returning eye for and eye, is not as simple as I once thought. If for any bad action that one does, you will return equally, the actions you both will inflict one one another will get worse. Vengeance causes more vengeance as it pulls more people into the cycle. Like a chain with a broken link, the upper part of the chain stays the same but the lower part which depends on the link follows it. In Naruto we see this in the form of killing of Sasuke. If Sasuke is killed, Naruto and his friends will not forgive the ones who did so and try to take revenge by killing them. If they succeed, the other party will do the same taking the other links in the chain with them into a cycle of revenge and vengeance. To stop this cycle you must be higher than these actions and find it in yourself to forgive the other side so the cycle never begins as it is hard to stop or understand other other side to stop the cycle. Stopping the cycle is hard because understating the other side is hard. In Naruto the character Pain is a great example of someone who has good intentions yet bad actions, making Naurto extremely hateful of him. Yet, by understating one another they have forgave one another stopping Pain's actions. 

When looked in a more general case: wars between nations seem to have similar yet slightly different cause and effect. For nations what is important are their internal and external interests. The reason for war is usually less emotional at the start but always very emotional when war erupts, since this is what makes people move. As is the case in the Pele pone Asian War, the Athens and the Spartans went to war not in response to allied countries provoking on another but the growing threat Athens posed on Sparta and the reverse. Of course that was only in the beginning. Near the beginning of war, emotion took over causing hate to sprout; allied forces joined in the effort putting fuel to fire, causing the more allied forces to join, and commencing the war effort. It is through this benefit thinking orientation leading to emotional hate making everyone to pick sides and eventually fight each for their cause, that war comes into existence. 

Both sides believe they are in the right. It is a fact that for each on their own, they have in their minds full rights to harm the other for the pain they feel. I for example have fully seen what this is like in the recent war in Israel that began on October 7, 2023. Israeli's had felt like it was fully justified to kill many Palestinians for the horrible actions that a few took. In a day or two Ham's managed to kill more than a thousand Israelis; a mortality rate not seen in years and years of small specialized operations in Gaza. Ham's was of course planning for years this operation of theirs. They for reasons which we might not fully understand have choose to hurt Israel in a grand way which was not seen in decades. For them the decision was natural, they want to eliminate the Zionists. On the other side, the pain people felt was real. The fear people felt was real. Reality hit Israel hard and people were emotional. Their friends died, whole families burnt alive, babies were killed, relatives were on the verge of death, houses burnt, and the sound of gunfire was loud and clear. War was a result of heightened emotions incurred by the Ham's operation and of course each side only thinking about their own pain.

At the beginning of war when the severity of the situation was not understood people were afraid and scrambled to stabilize the situation. Many civilians rushed to the army to join the efforts of repelling Ham's militants from the Israeli border. 

I think that actions speak louder than thoughts. For this reason I will try to put this to the test. I have someone that I maybe don't hate but I don't like as I have in he past. I will to to see whether by talking and trying to understand one another can we amend the weird status we are stuck at right now.
